## Translating the Frontend

In each folder related to the frontend (frontend, frontend_app_..., frontend_lib), a folder i18next.scanner holds translation files in JSON.

___

### I found a translation error, how do I fix it?

**If the error is in the translation key:**

1) You must find the key in the corresponding `.jsx` file of that same repo.

2) Fix the error

3) Rebuild the translation files with:

`yarn build:translation`

This will add your new key in the translation files and remove the old one.

4) commit/push your changes

**If the error is in the translations:**

You can make suggestions, or modify them directly if you have an account, on our [Weblate](https://hosted.weblate.org/projects/tracim/).
___

### I found an untranslated key in a language, how do I fix it?

An untranslated key leads to an English string appearing in the Tracim interface while using another language.

#### The key appears in the `.json` file

Same as the errors : you can make suggestions, or modify them directly if you have an account, on our [Weblate](https://hosted.weblate.org/projects/tracim/).

#### The key does not appear in the `.json` file

Do step 3).

If the key still isn't in the `.json` file, it means the text in the `.jsx` file does not implement the translation process.

So you must:

I) Find the corresponding `.jsx` file containing your untranslated key.

II) Wrap your untranslated key with the translation function `t`.

For instance, `<div>My untranslated key</div>` will become `<div>{this.props.t('My untranslated key')}</div>`

III) Make sure that `t` in available in your component by wrapping it with the `translate()` function as follows:

``` javascript
import React from 'react'
import { translate } from 'react-i18next'

class MyComponent extends React.Component {
  render () {
    return (<div>{this.props.t('My untranslated key')}</div>)
  }
}

export default translate()(MyComponent)
```

IV) You can destruct `t` from `this.props` in the `render()` like it is done in most components.

V) Do steps 3), 4)
